For example, Catling and Porebski (1994) found that observations of the plant Frangula alnus were generally concentrated around urban areas from the time this species was first observed in southern Ontario, late 1800s, up to the 1970s. This pattern may be the result of the fact that botanists were located near these areas, and thus their collections tended to come from these areas, or it may be that F. alnus grows well in ecological conditions near urban areas (e.g., disturbed environments). 


Adopting and modifying these methods, I address unanswered questions regarding the introduction and spread of the non-native invasive plant F. alnus throughout its full naturalized range.


CONSIDER PUTTING MOST OF THIS PARAGRAPH INTO THE DISCUSSION SECTION. Frangula alnus is purported to have had an extended lag phase (Catling and Porebski 1994, Frappier et al. 2003b, Larkin 2011), and various mechanisms have been proposed to explain this observation. Howell and Blackwell (1977) suggested that the rapid expansion of F. alnus into Ohio, following an extended period of presence in the eastern United States may be associated with the rapid expansion of the non-native European starling. Lending support to this idea, European starlings have recently been linked to the spread the non-native invasive plant Celastrus orbiculatus (Oriental bittersweet) (Merow et al. 2011), which is also a woody fruit-bearing plant. However, Catling and Porebski (1994) pointed out that the spread of F. alnus  in southern Ontario preceded the presence of European starlings, suggesting other mechanisms must be at play. While Howell and Blackwell’s speculation concerns the spread of F. alnus throughout the state of Ohio (>110,000 km2), Frappier and colleagues (2003b) speculate on a mechanism causing an observed extended lag phase in the invasion of a 250 m2 forest plot, suggesting that the lag may be due to “early selection and adaptation” to the local ecological conditions. Despite these speculations, it remains unclear as to whether F. alnus did in fact have an extended lag phase. 